docs/assembly_tutorial.md, before:

# CAIMAN REFERENCE
Author: Meredith Hu

## What is Caiman?
*This guide is for CAIMAN ASSEMBLY and not Original Caiman or Caiman Frontend. <br> <br>
Caiman is a research language that is a project of CU Capra. It is a “specification language” and it aims to reveal the optimality differences between different implementations of the same program. There are many levels of Caiman that one can write in. There is low-level Caiman in which if a user wants to implement anything, they must implement every aspect of the program to a level of detail unsuited for user programming. The developers of Caiman have attempted to mitigate this lack of user-friendliness by making Caiman Assembly, a more high level version of Caiman that is easier to write in but still requires lots of the formal specification of program features that is characteristic to the mission of Caiman as a project. Another project currently being developed is Caiman front end, a version of Caiman that is easier to use still.

Caiman Assembly reveals the differences in different implementations to the user by requiring the user to write a value codeblock and scheduling codeblock for any given program. The schedule codeblock must typecheck to the value code in order for the whole file to compile. The value code serves as a formal description of expressions a program must include to perform what it needs to, but the scheduling language actually implements this with allocations for local variables, function calls, and specification for where everything is placed. 

## How do I set up Caiman?
You can obtain caiman by cloning the git repository that Caiman lives at. 

1. [ ] Download Rust/Cargo if you don’t have them
2. [ ] Clone this repo: https://github.com/cucapra/caiman/tree/main 
3. [ ] To check if you have caiman, cd into the caiman directory and type “cargo run” as a command in your terminal, and if it prints an error message, you’re good 
4. [ ] Run cargo build to finish building caiman. 
5. [ ] Then, run the test file with python test.py in that folder, which tests if caiman works with the working test file in the test directory. 
run: https://github.com/cucapra/caiman/blob/main/caiman-test/test.py  

__Optional:__
Download the VSCode extension to add commenting capabilities 

## How do I test Caiman?
__How to create a program:__
1. [ ] Create your own Caiman branch to put your files on. For now, new tests can go in the repository `/caiman-test/basics`. 
2. [ ] Create a`.cair` file and a corresponding `.rs` file with the exact same name. Both files have to have `_test` at the end of their names in order to be testable by the python file. Again, make sure the files are somewhere in the `/caiman-test` directory.
3. [ ] Write Caiman Assembly code in the `.cair` file and Rust code in the `.rs` file. You should familiarize yourself with Caiman 101 <link here> to write a basic program.
4. [ ] To compile your code, do `cargo run – –input caiman-test\basics\<YOUR-TEST-NAME>_test.cair`.
5. [ ] To test your code, run `python test.py run basics/<YOUR-TEST-NAME>_test.cair`.

__How to debug your file:__ <br>
For now, debugging with Rust skills is a very practical option. You may also run the compiler with this flag after “run” to get a lot of information about the entered file:
`--explicate_only`

## Helpful Resources:
- [ ] [Rust basics]() 
- [ ] [Cargo basics](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rust-by-example/cargo.html)
- [ ] [Basic git branching theory](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Branching-Basic-Branching-and-Merging)

### Caiman References 
- [ ] Working Caiman Assembly Examples ()
- [ ] [Caiman Reference Guide](https://github.com/cucapra/caiman/blob/main/caiman-spec/src/content.ron)
- [ ] [More Caiman Reference](https://github.com/cucapra/caiman/blob/main/caiman-test/reference_untested/example.cair)

Commit message:

made some changes to the introduction paragraphs, added the svg diagram, changed description of explicate_only

docs/assembly_tutorial.md, after:

# CAIMAN REFERENCE
Author: Meredith Hu

## What is Caiman?
*This guide is for CAIMAN ASSEMBLY and not Original Caiman or Caiman Frontend. <br> <br>
Caiman is a research language that is a project of CU Capra. Caiman programs consist of several "specification languages" and an "implementation" of those specification languages. The intention of this divide in responsibility is to make it easier to explore performance tradeoffs while maintaining program semantics.
This repository contains implementations of three levels of abstraction for working with the Caiman compiler:

- The raw IR, which you can write directly as a Rust .ron file
- Caiman Assembly, which gives you exacting control over the generation of the Caiman IR (and is essentially just a .ron file with node names and some small quality of life changes)
- High Level Caiman (HLC), which lets you write Caiman with slightly higher-level semantics. Note that we are in the process of updating names so that HLC is just called Caiman, since this is the intended representation of the Caiman language.

The structure of the Caiman compiler, at the moment, is roughly as follows:

HLC -> Caiman Assembly -> Explication (currently empty) -> Caiman IR -> Rust
but you may also view a detailed visual diagram here: https://github.com/cucapra/caiman/blob/main/docs/compiler_structure.svg

Where each of these arrows can be "bypassed" by writing a lower level of abstraction. Note that typechecking is done on the Caiman IR, though HLC and Caiman Assembly also do some lowering work and may error as a result.

## How do I set up Caiman?
You can obtain caiman by cloning the git repository that Caiman lives at. 

1. [ ] Download Rust/Cargo if you don’t have them
2. [ ] Clone this repo: https://github.com/cucapra/caiman/tree/main 
3. [ ] To check if you have caiman, cd into the caiman directory and type “cargo run” as a command in your terminal, and if it prints an error message, you’re good 
4. [ ] Run cargo build to finish building caiman. 
5. [ ] Then, run the test file with python test.py in that folder, which tests if caiman works with the working test file in the test directory. 
run: https://github.com/cucapra/caiman/blob/main/caiman-test/test.py  

__Optional:__
Download the VSCode extension to add commenting capabilities. It can be found [here](https://github.com/Checkmate50/caiman-vsc).

## How do I test Caiman?
__How to create a program:__
1. [ ] Create your own Caiman branch to put your files on. For now, new tests can go in the repository `/caiman-test/basics`. 
2. [ ] Create a`.cair` file and a corresponding `.rs` file with the exact same name. Both files have to have `_test` at the end of their names in order to be testable by the python file. Again, make sure the files are somewhere in the `/caiman-test` directory.
3. [ ] Write Caiman Assembly code in the `.cair` file and Rust code in the `.rs` file. You should familiarize yourself with Caiman 101 <link here> to write a basic program.
4. [ ] To compile your code, do `cargo run – –input caiman-test\basics\<YOUR-TEST-NAME>_test.cair`.
5. [ ] To test your code, run `python test.py run basics/<YOUR-TEST-NAME>_test.cair`.

__How to debug your file:__ <br>
For now, debugging with Rust skills is a very practical option. You may also run the compiler with the this flag to see the translation to the intermediate representation, including any explication that was done:
`--explicate_only`

## Helpful Resources:
- [ ] [Rust basics]() 
- [ ] [Cargo basics](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rust-by-example/cargo.html)
- [ ] [Basic git branching theory](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Branching-Basic-Branching-and-Merging)

### Caiman References 
- [ ] Working Caiman Assembly Examples ()
- [ ] [Diagram of Caiman Compiler](https://github.com/cucapra/caiman/blob/main/docs/compiler_structure.svg)
- [ ] [Caiman Reference Guide](https://github.com/cucapra/caiman/blob/main/caiman-spec/src/content.ron)
- [ ] [More Caiman Reference](https://github.com/cucapra/caiman/blob/main/caiman-test/reference_untested/example.cair)
